Morning, James.
Morning, now.
Morning, James. Is that good for
you?
Sure.
That's
that.
Yes.
Well, welcome James and your team to the Select Committee this
morning for the Annual Review. Um, look we have got a
structured agenda here, which, um, I'm sure that you're all familiar with.
Um, and we will try and stick to that as much as we can so we can have some
structure to the four hours that you have with us today.
Um, so look, we'll open it up to you to perhaps, uh, make some
introductions and, uh, give us some insights and then, uh, we'll open
up for questions.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, ǁta mārie, kei koutou.
Uh, very good morning, committee.
Um, we've got a good team here from, uh, the Ministry.
Uh, we've got senior lea- leadership team here, uh, and a couple of extra key
staff. Uh, it's a full turn-out this morning,
reflecting, uh, the scale of the work that's been, uh, undertaken this last
year. And I just have to start by saying it's my particular privilege
to be, uh, here this morning. Uh, having the
opportunity to reflect on, uh, the year that was, uh, for,
uh, the Ministry for the Environment for '23/'24.
It was a significant year of, uh, delivery during a
period of change and some challenge.
We started the financial year with a, uh, all-staff
consultation on a major re-organization, uh, to reflect the reduction
in, uh, spending by the agency of, uh, 240 million the year
before down to 180, uh, uh, in the year that that has
been. Um, that consultation resulted
ultimately in 278 redundancies, uh, in the
Ministry, and our, um, permanent, uh, workforce
reduced from 824 down to
686, uh, as of 30- 31 October this year.
So, significant amount of change and many of our staff, uh, had changes
in roles, changes in teams, changes in reporting lines.
And we, uh, we migrated to
a, uh, a, a smaller organization and a structure to reflect
that. Uh, but notwithstanding that, uh, the work continued
and, uh, in October, we passed the, um...
(clears throat)
No, we sort of supported the government and supported, um, uh, Select Committee in
passing the, uh, first Resource Management Reform, uh, Bill.
In December, we introduced the second, uh, Resource Management, uh,
Reform Bill, uh, which was enacted in August of this year.
Um, the Fast-Track Approvals, uh, Act was enacted in December,
uh, and went live in February. And we worked with colleagues across agencies and
the Environmental Protection Authority, in particular, to stand up that.
Uh, while we were doing that, we're working with the expert advisory group on
replacing the Resource Management Act.
And, uh, supported them in producing their report.
Um, we were developing the largest package of national direction changes
under the RMA ever undertaken by, uh, any government.
And consultation, uh, was i-initiated in May on
that. Uh, we also, uh, provided a large amount of
advice to Minister Bishop and Undersecretary Court on,
uh, the, uh, soon to be introduced, uh, Planning and Natural
Environment Bills. On the climate side, uh, we supported the
Government to develop a climate strategy, uh, the second Emiss- Emissions Reduction
Plan, uh, the tabling of a second nationally determined
contribution. Uh, we undertook the first biannual transparency
recor- r- report, uh, required under, um, the Paris
Agreement. We, uh, supported the government to introduce, uh,
Climate Change Response Act, uh, Amendment Bill for forestry conversion.
Uh...
We undertook the review of the 2050, uh, target.
Um, there were the annual ETS settings, uh, consultations
and, uh, and decisions, uh, and also, um, further
review of the Climate Change Response Act.
Uh, the adaptation, uh, work continued and, uh, we
supported the independent advisory group, uh, in producing their report
for, uh, ministers and then ultimately decisions by Cabinet, uh, which
were reflected in the announcements earlier this year and are coming through, uh,
legislative reform, uh, for that adaptation framework.
We continue to support the Maori Climate Platform and got away, um, a
significant number of projects, uh, around the country on that.
Um, as I think has been, uh, announced in, in the last 24 hours
or so, um, we were also working with Ministry for Regulation on reviewing the
Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act in respect of agricultural
compounds. Uh, and that is now resulting in, um,
uh, the sort of drafting that will come forward.
Uh, we stood up the Tiewise scheme and that's been hugely, uh, successful,
uh, lots of years of work building towards that.
Um, and we have been continuing to progress our refrigerant gases and
agricultural plastics, uh, product stewardship
scheme. Uh, we produced Our Air, uh, uh, and, uh, Our
Environment 2025, which is our three yearly, uh, State of Environment
report, uh, for New Zealand. Also, uh, procured,
uh, a bunch of digital, um, data platforms
including, uh, national, uh, climate, uh,
hazard, uh, information, uh, with, uh,
NIWA. Um, overall, uh, I have to say it was a
record, uh, volume of, uh, deliverables by the
Ministry. Um, uh, despite the, uh, reduction
in resources, uh, overall-
(clears throat) .
Uh, the Ministry produced, uh, in terms of outputs to ministers,
parliament, uh, and the public, uh,
4,822, um, uh, items which
included 896 briefings, 62 Cabinet papers,
452 O- OAs, um, and many more,
um, parliamentary questions and ministerial pieces or ministerial co-
correspondence.Uh, while doing all of that, um,
as is reflected in the annual report, uh, our quality of advice has
improved and we have, um, continued to progress, uh, on our, um,
target metrics there. Um, our turnaround, uh, on
OAAs, we've met targets there. Ministerial satisfaction is up.
Um, we have enhanced overall the evidence base for the ministry, um,
and we have int- introduced a much more centralized, um, organizational,
um, business planning and performance monitoring, uh, system, which is really
showing, uh, results. Uh, and we did really set out the year
as a senior leadership team with the organization as saying after organizational
change it was going to be a year of performance, uh, and we were really gonna focus
on, uh, getting as- as much, uh, delivery from the organization with
our increasingly scarce resources as possible.
Um, so I'm just delighted with, uh, the annual report that, uh, has
been, uh, produced, because it, uh, I think provides a good summary
of that. And also as you will have heard from our auditors, uh, we've continued to
progress, um, the quality of our financial systems and controls from good
now to very good. Uh, and just note that, um, in terms of
the government's target of 10-day, uh, processing of
invoices, we're at 95.9%, so over target
there, uh, and leading the government in electronic
invoicing. Uh, management, um, control environment,
uh, uh, has also maintained as very good.
Uh, and then in performance information we're still at good, and I hope by next
year we'll be very good on that too, and it has been noted by the auditors, um, as
well as our independent audit risk committee, um, that the ministry's come a long
way in terms of its non-financial reporting, and hopefully that's useful, uh, to
the committee. Um, there's been a huge amount of work to- to ensure that's as
meaningful as possible. So, um, uh, Madam Chair, in
summary, uh, what I would just, uh, draw the committee's attention to
is the fact that the ministry, uh, has worked with less, has
delivered more, uh, and, uh, has done so with high
quality, uh, of, uh, outputs and performance.
And I think, uh, that is a enormous credit to, um, the good
people of the Ministry for the Environment.
They have worked extraordinarily hard, incredibly, uh, professionally, and
with dedication, uh, to public service.
Mm-hmm.
So I'm enormously proud of them and very grateful, uh, for their work this year.
Thank you.
Well, thank you, James, and thank you to your team.
It's always good to hear that, you know, you're working with less but producing
more. So, uh, yeah, that's really efficient and good.
But look, we've got lots of questions, so, uh, we'll start with
Rachel.
Uh, thank you, uh, and congratulations to your team, who I know are
working very hard, and we obviously see them a lot here at this
committee. But, um, I'm wondering in terms of this
statement that they're doing, um, you're working with less but
you're doing more, seems that there's a lot more stress as well.
So the... Uh... Um,
we've got here the figure of 54% of
staff, um, often, um, reporting stress.
Do you- do you think that's to do with the less and more
relationship?
I think it is to do with the, uh, the pace at which we're working, um,
and, uh, that has been the case for a number of years
now. Uh, and I do think, and I have said this to the committee
before, uh, I do think that the cadence of the New Zealand parliamentary
system, uh, particularly the three-year term-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, does result in- uh, in governments on all sides of the house, uh,
moving at pace. And I do recognize that we're often addressing, uh,
urgent issues for New Zealanders and that everybody is ambitious
for, uh, delivery, um, but it is certainly true, uh,
that the- that the pace at which the public service is- is now working,
uh, and I think particularly, um, since the COVID era, uh, we've got
very agile and very good at running at sprints, uh, you know, it does
put, uh, significant pressure on our people.
So th- that is a- um, an area of close focus and concern for the senior leadership
team, and we have a number of initiatives in place to, um, to support our staff
in that regard, um, but there are things that we can't control and those are
particularly the time frames that the parliamentary process, uh, demands of
us, including, you know, a big legislative volume.
Just a supplement.
Y- yes, Lum.
Thank you. Um, and thank you for your work, James, and acknowledging
your resignation as well and your mo- movement.
That's really exciting, to live in your role.
Um, I just wanted to pick up on, you mention in your report, you describe it
as an unprecedented pace of
change. What outcome... Like, what do you think this actually
means? You've mentioned the staff impacts.
What about the actual outcomes that you're delivering in terms of your work
with this unprecedented pace?
Well, I think, um, that, look, the biggest body of work that we've undertaken has
been the replacement of the Resource Management Act, uh, and, uh,
I think, um, there's an awful lot of work for select committee,
and I assume it will, uh, be this select committee, uh, to,
uh, further work through that legislation.
So, I think there's always a, um, uh, there's a trade-off for a
government in- in how much deliberation you might do, how much consultation you
might do in the development of policy and in legislation before it reaches the
house, and how much do you rely on the select committee process.
Um, uh, we have, uh, at the, um, request
of government, uh, worked very quickly to bring legislation before the
house, and so, um, in- in that regard, uh, the legislation
will, uh, require further refinement, uh, in the select committee process, and I
think this will be a case of where the select committee is going to have to do, uh,
more of the heavy lifting than it might have done if we had perhaps a-
another whole parliamentary term to quietly work up some
proposals, consult on them more broadly, um, stress test them, et
cetera. And I think that's the- the balance of- of workload really
between-... the executive and the, and the legislature.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. Look, we will take a few more sups on this.
I'm just, um, for those following, um, we are looking at overall
performance. Um, that's the topic that we're currently on, so
we'll just keep the question lines to that kind of area before we move on to RMA
and other areas. Um, Chloe?
Yeah, so just particularly on that point around the balance in select committee and
legislature executive, uh, one of the big pieces of legislative reform
that's coming down the pipeline is, of course, the halving of the methane targets.
Will that bill have a select committee process?
Uh, uh, the, uh, Climate Change Response
Act will go through a select committee process.
Um, there will be, uh, amendments to, uh, the
legislation that may be progressed on a, uh, on a tighter timeframe.
So the Climate Change Response Act, so, so just to understand how many pieces of
leg might flow from all of the announcements-
Mm-hmm.
... that have come out over the last month or so, particularly here, I'm
talking about the halving of the biogenic-
Yeah.
... methane target. So that piece of legislation is
encapsulated with the other reforms that are occurring as well, or has it got its
own specific piece of leg?
It's being introduced together as-
Yeah.
... as one package. Sam, what's the status of-
So there are some-
... the ministers?
There are some options that Ministers have.
Uh, so there's a combination of, um, uh,
policy decisions, including the methane target-
Mm-hmm.
... along with the package changes that were announced recently
related to the CCRA-
Yep.
... as well as adaptation planning, uh, legislative requirements.
And so there are some options that ministers need to-
Still make decisions on.
... work through to make sure the final mix, um, legislative
mix is sorted as to whether or not, um, it goes in
one or two packages. But I would expect that there's likely to be two pieces of
legislation. And the intention has been to, um,
uh, move on and legislate pretty quickly on the, on the
methane target.
I mean, noting that we've only got two more sitting weeks of the-
Yeah. (laughs)
... House left this year, so am I hearing from MFE that there will be a
select committee process for the biogenic methane target?
That's not, that's not our decision to make.
Okay. But have you provided advice that hasn't, has said that there is possibility
for there to be a select committee process for it?
Uh, depend, depends on the time frames and the approach.
It's up to ministers as to what process they want.
Okay, so what I'm hearing is that you've said that it is possible, but it is up to
ministers to use their discretion.
Correct.
Okay. So that basically means there could potentially be public input
into that biogenic methane target being
reset.
I think what we can say is that, that there will be a legislative vehicle to amend
the Climate Change Response Act going to select committee-
Mm-hmm.
... next year, and that is a vehicle, um, that could have encapsulated those
issues. But those are choices for ministers.
Great. Thank you. And Grant has a supplementary.
Yeah, thank you, um, James, and ack- acknowledge the, obviously
the work, uh, that staff, um, contribute over the last
couple of years in particular. I mean, as a businessperson myself, farmer,
I appreciate doing, uh, more with less, comes with, comes with the
territory, so I really appreciate it. Thank you.
Um, now just, you talk about the RMA and the amount of time,
um, uh, the, the, the focus on that and the amount of
effort that's gone into that, and the fact you, you, you, you...
The point I want to make is, given the importance of the RMA for every aspect
of, of, of New Zealanders' lives, whether it's creating renewable energy to help
deal with power pri-, you know, the power supply issues in this country-
Mm-hmm.
... housing costs and so forth, do you think it's, you know...
And do you not think that's appropriate then to say, "Okay, yes, we
acknowledge it's been a lot of work, but the importance to the country is such that
we actually then need to get on and achieve these things for, for the wider good of
the community"?
Certainly in our advice to ministers, uh, we have,
uh, we have recommended,
uh, that the system trans- transition to the new system
as quickly as possible.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and that was something that was discussed with the expert advisory group as
being desirable overall. The longer it takes,
uh, the more, uh, confusion there will be of running dual
systems, uh, and inertia potentially created in
the implementation. So certainly the minister- the ministry has
recommended, uh, taking a, a rapid approach to the
implementation. The policy development, notwithstanding my earlier
comments about how rapidly the work has been done in the last year-
Mm-hmm.
... did benefit from the previous government's reforms and
reviews. So the ministry has had now five-plus
years of solid RMA, uh, reconsideration,
including the input of a range of advisory groups, et cetera.
So, um, there are elements of the reforms that will be
introduced, uh, in the next week by the, uh, government that will be
common to, uh, the previous reforms and will buil- build on those
reforms. Uh, and there will be, um, areas of distinction as well.
So I think, uh, I think we've got a really solid foundation, uh, both as a
ministry but also as a country in terms of understanding what are the
issues with the performance of the Resource Management Act and what are some of
those solutions. And so, um, I'm really confident with the
legislative package that's coming to the committee next week, uh, as being
something that, uh, is workable-
Yep.
... um, but it will benefit from, uh, the, the, the select committee's
process, certainly.
Thank you. Appreciate it.
And Lan?
Thank you. Um, we've had the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment
very helpfully,
uh, inform us about the change in overall budgeted
expenditure for the environment.
And he's pointed out that in the previous financial year, this annual
review year, it was at 36, sorry, 3.6
billion and is projected for this financial year to be
moving to 2.6 billion. And Forest and Bird have very
helpfully pointed out that that's essentially equal to one
urban roading-
... development project. Do you feel that the
environment is being deprioritized within these, within
government's decisions?
I think those funding changes reflect, uh,
some, uh, time-limited funding, certainly what came through the Jobs For Nature
program, uh, but also, uh, the one-off funding
associated with, uh, recovery from severe weather, Cyclone
Gabrielle. And I know that embedded within those numbers were,
um, uh, the funding for buyouts, for example.
So, um, I think there are some contextual,
uh, drivers for that reduction. Um, I think, look,
overall, uh, we have seen an increase in
institutional capability, and I think the Parliamentary Commissioner's advice is
that, um, the work that, uh,
the, um, the ministries and departments, uh, of government that work in this area
have continued to build capability.
It's been the on-the-ground delivery where, um, the
time-limited funding has particularly come to an end.
And so, I think in those areas, particularly in constrained economic
times, uh, not only for the government's books but also for businesses and
business owners and for communities, um, it's not
surprising that there is less to go around.
And you'll hear that in the voluntary sector as well as hearing that, uh, in the
private sector. So, I think that is a point in the economic cycle.
Uh, and as we come out of that, there are opportunities for everybody to
invest more, uh, in the environment.
And a supplementary.
Thank you. So, just on that, what do you think it says
about New Zealand's, I guess, lack of investment in
environmental expenditure when a few
climate-charged weather events can cause such
a disruption and such a change in our
expenditure when we know that we're gonna have this,
these kinds of events happen more frequently in the future?
The ministry, uh, uh, regularly
surveys, uh, public opinion on environmental matters, uh, and
that's, uh, important information for us to inform,
uh, ministers, uh, about, uh, public sentiment, and also
for us to understand the, um, the public expectation of our
work. And what we have seen, uh, over the last couple of
years as a consequence of the stress on households and, um,
businesses and communities has been a reduction in the priority
of, uh, environmental action and investment in the environment for New
Zealanders, um, and I think that just reflects, uh, uh,
the, the, the priorities and the, and the issues that, that, that people are
facing. So again, I think it's, uh, time and place, um,
and in my role, um, I'm incredibly,
um, uh, uh, sympathetic to the fact that
for most New Zealanders, uh, there are more near-term, uh,
pressing priorities for them. Uh, we obviously, uh,
see a lot of data, uh, that talks to long-term,
uh, systemic challenges for the country, um, and those exist in other
areas outside of the environment as well.
Mm-hmm.
And I think the challenge for, uh, for New Zealand, um, particularly
given our, uh, relatively,
um, poor economic performance in the last few years, is to
sustain investment in a whole range of areas that require a long-term, uh,
focus. And I just think that's hard for New Zealanders.
It's also, also it's hard for a three-year electoral cycle.
Mm-hmm. Thank you, and Rachel.
Well, a supplementary on that. Relative to
whom? You just said that we'd had a poor
economic, relatively poor economic
times.
So-
Isn't the whole world?
Yeah, so, so
rel- relative to p- previous periods.
Yeah. Okay, thank you. Uh, a different question,
um, we've talked about this reduction in staff, and
has ... Can you tell us if it's created any delays,
um, or risks in f- fulfilling statutory
obligations?
We ... Uh, so, so I think the s- the short answer to that
is no. Uh, we have focused, uh, and we focused
very heavily on, uh, developing our new operating model
and our new organizational structure on ensuring we could meet our statutory
requirements. The contraction was more, uh, in the, the
work that had grown over time that you could say is more discretionary,
uh, particularly related to those time-limited programs, uh,
and the level of community engagement and outreach that, that we
might do. Um, so it is our core-
Oh,
OK. ... uh, statutory functions that we continue to prioritize.
Thank you. And so, if, uh, the, the
people are going more at the policy end, a- acknowledging that you've just said
community engagement as well, uh, are you able to give free and
frank advice to ministers?
Yes.
And have you observed any instances of ministerial
requests to alter or reshape, um, your advice to
align with their political priorities?
No.
Okay, thank you. Um,
and
the, uh, further reductions in staff,
what, where, what parts of the ministry
will they, will be affected by those, those reductions?
So, at the moment, we've, we've essentially got a, a, a ...
Well, we do have a freeze on, uh, recruiting new permanent
staff except by, um, uh, absolute exception, and that
reflects the fact that there is a declining baseline in, in out
years.
Yeah.
But we also, uh, have, um,
a, a program business case which has been, uh, publicly acknowledged by Minister
Bishop-... to fund the, uh, implementation of the government's
resource management reforms. That will require a surge in
resources in the ministry on a time-limited basis, so we do,
uh, anticipate that that reduction in overall headcount will,
will plateau, uh, and that we will maintain a, um,
similar wor- size workforce to what we have today over the next couple of years to
deliver that work. That is all still subject to Budget 26 decision-making,
so I can't be certain of that-
Of
course. ... um, but we're essentially holding, holding, uh, still at the moment until we
get certainty around that.
Okay, so you are expecting there will be
more resource for the implementation of RMA reforms,
but that more resource will just be that you don't reduce as much as you
were planning to reduce?
There are some, there are some, uh, uh, additional skills, uh, and
capabilities that we will need to bring into the ministry.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, the reforms are predicated on a digitally-enabled
system.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, a data-heavy system, uh, data-informed,
so, uh, we, we will be needing to bring in, uh, new skills into the
ministry. Um, we do have, uh, digital capabilities, but certainly
not of the, um, of the scale required to fully
digitalize New Zealand's resource management system.
Okay. That sounds expensive.
It can be.
Because (whispers)
It is. Yes, although I... Look, I would just say, uh, to the member that the,
the work we've done on the economic, economic benefits of
the, um, digitization and the overall transformation of the system are
significant.
Yeah.
So we do believe that there are significant productivity benefits for New Zealand
from moving to a digital-
Yeah.
... a digital-first-
Excellent.
... planning system.
Thank
you. And I don't disagree with that. Oh, gosh.
Thank you. We've got a couple more supplementaries. Uh, Ryan.
Uh, thanks, Chair. Look, it just opened up something that's quite exciting.
When you talk about the digital potential that's coming, are you able to speak more
about it without getting ahead of next week's reforms?
Uh, I'd perhaps just decline that one-
Mm-hmm.
... given that there will be announcements by Minister Bishop next week and I don't
want to steal his thunder.
Yeah, thank you very much.
Okay.
It's just a little teaser I picked up.
And, uh, Priyanka.
Thank you. Mine could really be a sup, and it's on, uh, the staffing
numbers that you have-
Mm-hmm. ... in your responses to written questions.
And I see that your fixed-term and your headcount have gone down, as you've
mentioned, but, and I also take the point that contracting has changed in
terms of how you re-, um, your recording of
contractors, but it has more than doubled, um, of,
since the 20, you know, between the 23/24
years and the 24/25. So can you explain what, what
that's about?
The contractor expenditure?
Yeah.
Uh, the 23/24 year, uh, was,
uh, the year in which we completed the resource management reforms and we'd had a
very large, uh, program of, uh, contracting, uh, up until that
point, and it was obviously during the time of change of government,
so, um, uh, the overall reform,
uh, work of the ministry, uh, was largely on hold during that
period, and so we did have a significant drop in our contracting, uh,
requirements. Um, as we have come back into, uh,
the, um, the, the reform program, uh, the renewed reform
program, that has required us to contract in, uh, some additional
resource. Um, uh, but overall, we're still
below, uh, well below where we were, uh, uh, historically,
um, uh, during the previous, uh, period of reform, and we're certainly within
the, uh, the cap that's been set for us by the Public Service Commission.
So would you say that it's, um, reasonably, uh,
common practice or usual practice that
agencies, ministries would contract out,
um, or increase spending on contractors when there are
time-limited projects, rather than adding to your
fixed-term headcount?
So, so certainly, uh, when there is a surge because there is
a major reform piece of work to do, for example,
um, uh, certainly doesn't make sense to try to procure
permanent employees-
Mm-hmm.
... when that is, uh, the work is fixed-term and the, and the funding is
fixed-term. So yes, we complement, uh,
We also use fixed-term employees as well, um, and a mix of both
contractors and fixed-term employees to manage that workload,
uh, uh, peak.
Just coming back to that staffing though, 'cause I think it's quite an interesting
that, you know, obviously the ministry had kind of gone from 300 to 1,000
quite quickly and then obviously come back, um, a, a
few hundred and, but then obviously you're still managing your workload
and, um, you know, producing, uh, uh, more efficiently
and streamlined. So, um, has the workload,
um, increased
to... And then do you feel that the numbers are round where they should be
currently?
So, look, the, the workload has increased, uh, well, it went, it went
through a di- through change of government and has, has got back
to comparable levels, uh, as, as it was with the
previous government in policy and legislative reform.
So we are, we are really at, at, at full noise on that.
Yeah.
Uh, it is in the area of, uh, community engagement as, as I
suggested before, and administration of, uh, particular funds,
uh, spent on the ground with community groups, and obviously the Jobs For Nature,
uh, is a, is an example of that, where there has been the ending of
those and there has been, um, some retrenchment of the ministry's
staffing and capability, uh, to support that sort of work.
So, um, it's not exactly an apples for apples, uh,
comparison between, um, the, the parliamentary terms, if you
like. Um, what we've just had to do is, uh, work within our means and
also, uh, deliver the work. That has resulted in the organization, uh,
working smarter. Um, we are making use of, uh,
technology. Uh, we are, have also changed, uh, some of the ways
in which, um, the organization deploys r- resource internally so it is more
flexible, uh, agile, um, more cross-organizational teams
to, to deliver.
Mm-hmm.
And I think, look, over time I think every organization gets, gets kind of
better and better at sweating its resources, um, and there
has been, um, a, a, a considerable amount of innovation within the way we
work, uh, and that has helped deliver, uh, more with less as well.
Yeah. Brilliant, thank you. Um, Laan?
Can I move on to strategic priorities?
Um-
Just checking there.
Yes, yes-
Which is my
next- ... yeah, that's all within, within, within the same area.
Yeah, great. Thank you.
Yes, absolutely. Um, so I wanted to pick up on just MFE's role generally.
And you outline that you see a role as stewards of the
resource, environmental and climate management systems, environmental
data, et cetera, et cetera, to deal with some of New Zealand's biggest
challenges. This government's significant
budget cuts combined with their legislative program has often been
referred to as waging a war on nature.
Do you think that actually increases your
responsibility in terms of your role as stewards?
And you mentioned earlier about the challenge
of, you know, people needing to provide for their everyday essentials and
might not be looking up to what's going on in the environmental
space. How does that actually reflect in MFE's role and your
responsibility to actually uphold environmental
protections?
Well, I just want to be clear about the, um, the word, uh,
system in there. So, the Ministry's stewardship is not a
stewardship of New Zealand's environment, natural environment, built
environment.
Um, uh, our stewardship relates to the system that administers that.
And that's a critical distinction because, uh, it is,
uh, the job of elected representatives from, uh, New
Zealand through Parliament, uh, and through, uh, the
executives to make decisions about relative investment, uh,
relative regulatory and policy settings.
Uh, it is our job to administer a system that enables, uh, people
to make informed choices. So we focus very heavily on
ensuring that there are the legislative and regulatory frameworks in which
New Zealanders, whether that be central government or local government or
individual, uh, industries, for example, through things like product stewardship,
are able to, uh, t- to make decisions and implement
those with appropriate tools. So we focus heavily on the data and evidence to
in- inform decision-making, uh, and ensuring we've got fit for purpose,
um, decision-making regulatory, um, systems that enable
those, uh, relative and changing societal values and
preferences to be effectively, uh, get, well, reflected and given
effect to.
Mm-hmm.
So that is, that is how the Ministry thinks about its role.
And I think there's often, um, some degree of confusion about that.
Mm-hmm.
And if we're not clear about that, then I think we start becoming ambiguous about
what's the Ministry's role as a public serv- service institution supporting
the elected government of the day-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, and the Ministry having some kind of advocacy role that it does not have.
So just-
Yeah. ... a quick sup on that. So, you, you make it really clear that
those priorities reflect the government's objectives.
And you've just outlined that you see it as elected members' roles to be
delivering on the actual environmental outcomes.
There's no mention of actual environmental improvement or
halting the decline. Do you see that as a
barrier to actually achieving ecologically
meaningful improvement
or...
w- where is the role of MFE if the elected members
are not aiming for that material improvement?
I think that the barrier exists if the Ministry is not effective at being
able to advise the government of the day, uh, of its
choices, advise New Zealanders about the state of our environment, uh,
and the choices they face about achieving different outcomes, uh,
on that. Uh, and, uh, there are barriers if the Ministry is not able
to translate the, uh, the will of, uh, an
elected government into effective policy and deliver on the
ground. Um, I'm satisfied that the Ministry is
working, uh, extremely effectively at being able to
reflect, uh, the views and priorities of, of the government of the
day and, uh, translate those into the outcomes that it is
seeking.
Thank you. And then we've got a couple more sups on this, so we'll go to Rachel.
Thank you. So looking at strategic priority one, that is improve
the resource management system to be more efficient and effective.
And then, uh, sorry, this point about whether or not MFE has a role in
improving the environment, and that's something I've asked the Minister about a
change in language before. And you look down and it says, "Safeguard
the environment and human health." Um, in your answer to Laan just
now, are you saying that it, it's not the
job of MFE to look for improvements in the
environment? That's the Minister, this point,
the Minister for the Environment, uh,
doesn't have a priority of improvement and the safeguarding is in the
legislation, so you only want to go as far as safeguarding?
Putting aside your point about MFE not doing advocacy, I-
Mm-hmm.
... recognize the structural role of MFE, but I would have thought
improving the environment was, was something
relevant to, to your work.
Certainly is. And so we provide a whole range of advice about options and
opportunities to do so. But those choices about what, uh, of
those options and opportunities to pursue are choices for the
government.
Thank you.
And Chloe has a supplementary.
Yeah, I mean, it was just particularly about that work in advising and, and
scrutiny with Treasury officials yesterday.
Uh, they made clear that it was MFE who was the priority agency when it came to
working with the Climate Change Commission on macroeconomic modeling and so
different pathways and options in front of us.
Um, you'll be aware to that effect that the Climate Change Commission has advised
that, you know, upgrading our targets or increasing the strength of the targets,
raising the floor of the biogenic methane target, but also, um, taking out net zero
to beyond net zero to, um, uh, reductions is
entirely affordable, uh, and also actually consistent with
economic growth. More than that, it means that we're taking advantage of economic
opportunities. Could you elaborate on how MFE helped to come to
those conclusions with the Climate Change Commission?
So the, the commission is independent and, uh, forms its own views.
We engage, uh, them. We share, um, uh, some
modeling so that we're working off the same evidential base, but they draw their
own conclusions.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
It is important to be clear about their independence.
Yeah.
So, uh, what we do is faithfully reflect, uh,
their views, uh, and recommendations through ministers.
And we provide, uh, complementary advice to that.
Um, uh, and then obviously ministers make
their decisions weighing all of that up.
Mm-hmm.
Sam, is there anything you wanted to add on that?
No, I, I think that that's a really key point is actually that the commission
have maintained and have been very deliberate about
maintaining that space and that independence.
So, um, it's often a case that we are then
needing to undertake our own analysis to then
provide advice to ministers on options and choices.
So, I think there is quite a clear line, um, that has been
well-observed by the commission, uh, and ourselves in terms of our respective
roles.
Yeah, I mean if I can just pick up on that point-
Mm-hmm.
... that was kind of being made before, especially, um, with regard to how it feels
as though the climate crisis has slipped down the list of priorities for New
Zealanders. I completely understand that.
It's hard to care about the end of the world if you can't put food on the table for
the end of the week. But how is it that you guys balance
the, uh, kind of immediate needs that people have,
uh, and the advice that you give there and in terms of, you know, the intersection
with climate war, environmental policy and cost of living challenges with
these longer term issues? Because as we all know, the climate crisis is a cost of
living disaster (laughs) . How do you balance that when it comes to giving your
advice?
We obviously don't, uh, provide primary advice around things like
the cost of living and the stresses-
Of course.
... that households are facing. Um, but we're just cognizant of it and
when we provide our advice, that that is the receiving environment and that's what
ministers are balancing-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, collectively. Um, what we do to inform the
overall balance of considerations is, uh, provide long-term,
uh, forecasting, uh, and projections.
So, um, we project out New Zealand's climate emissions to
2050, for example, uh, and we provide ministers with a view
about the longer term, uh, economic consequences
and, uh, and environmental consequences as well.
So, it's very much, uh, our part of the system is to
provide that long view, uh, and, um, other
agencies are, are providing ministers with much more near-term advice about
near-term considerations of New Zealanders.
So, uh, you know, we see our advice going into the mix, uh,
of, um, different government departments all operating on different horizons.
If I can just ask a final question on that point?
Yeah, just go
Just to be, I guess, really explicit, because I totally take onboard that you're
not providing immediate cost of living (laughs) advice.
Uh, but, you know, as you've alluded to, you do give that forecasting out to 2050
and you assist with regard to the macroeconomic modeling.
Uh, could you be explicit with the committee about how, you know,
in the range of advice that you've given, particularly on environmental
degradation, um, and in the climate space as well,
uh, I guess the cost of living impacts out into the future if, uh,
climate change were to be unabated?
Well, so there has been, uh, there has been some work done over time
around, uh, the impacts on GDP, uh, for
example, uh, from, uh, severe weather.
Um, so Treasury's done some, some modeling around that.
I'd have to say that, uh, the uncertainties associated with,
um, the physical impacts on climate ch- of climate change on
households
is very fraught. Um, there are, um,
enormous uncertainties about the timing of those, uh, con-
those events and their, uh, scale and significance.
Um, we have confidence that we will have increasingly severe weather.
Yeah.
Precisely when, at what cost and impact, uh, is devilishly
hard. Um, the work that has been done has looked a- at past events
and broadly looked at, at the probabilities around that and the
impact on GDP. Um, but what is much more difficult to
account for when it comes to the cost of living for households are things like
global supply chains, food security, food production globally,
um, uh, and how that might impact on the cost of imported goods, for
example, that impact on, on households as well.
So, um, I would say we don't have a good handle, uh, as a country
and probably, um, the world doesn't have a particularly good handle on those
longer term costs as they will lie, uh, at ho-
household level, uh, as a result of climate change.
But they will get worse (laughs) .
Um, we would exp- expect the cost to rise.
Mm-hmm.
Um, certainly, uh, uh, I consider that climate change will
overall probably have some degree of inflationary effect-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, on, um, the global economy over time, and we see that from the cost
of, uh, responding to and recovering from severe weather, but we also
see it in things like, um, uh, water insecurity,
uh, food insecurity-
Mm-hmm.
Right, yeah. ... those sorts of things. Yeah.
I might just, just add that that's actually a really, um, quite
difficult and I think somewhat contested element of
policy, trying to reach a view
around the extent to which you might look at that transition as an
opportunity versus a cost.
Yeah. Okay.
And, um, it depends a lot on,
uh, how global markets will develop, how
technology may evolve. So, it's actually quite difficult
to, I think, reach, uh, a, a view
around the balance of opportunity versus cost in that transition
that people are aligned around because it requires so much judgment
and sort of assumption about how things in the future will unfold.
Mm-hmm.
It's a tricky-
Almost
like acting. It's a difficult area.
But acting early would be a good thing.
Uh, well, that, that's the thing that's tricky to know is you can
spend or absorb cost in the short term with a view to
reaping benefits down the line.
Mm-hmm.
The question is at what point do you get the return and to what extent?
And how do you trade that off against the-
Boiling point.
... potential cost in the, in the short term?
Mm-hmm. And a- actually just leading on from that, because, um, you mentioned
water and water security and how important that is-
Yes.
... um, obviously when it comes to climate change and, um, you know,
mitigating against it given we're having drier summers and just in
Hawke's Bay yesterday-
Mm-hmm.
... you know, that was the number one issue across the region is water security, as
you well know, um, James. I mean, how much o- of that
is, is the ministry kind of involved with in terms of looking at
how, you know, we, we mitigate that risk?
Uh, so the work we have been doing has been on the resource management system-
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
... uh, national direction around, uh, water storage and so that's-
Mm-hmm.
... ongoing work, uh, that we've been doing with, uh, with ministers around
how, uh, water storage can be provided for, uh, more
simply within the resource management system.
Uh, in terms of the very specific looking at- at-
at locations, opportunities, et cetera, that's work that the Ministry for the
Prime- Primary Industries has been leading and we have been, um, keeping close to
it and feeding into it. Certainly, um, uh, uh,
there is no question that, uh, New Zealand will be wa- more water
stressed in many regions, uh, in the future.
Mm-hmm.
And the water storage is a, uh, is a part of the solution mix on that.
All right, thank you. And Grant had a supplementary.
Yes. Yeah, this is fascinating area actually, um, because the developing
system, you know, um, like a fast track system, for example, to deal with
some of the challenges we've- we inherited, like this government inherited from
the last government, a big pile of coal.
And one of the things we are able to- we need to do is be able to develop renewable
energy to re- reduce our reliance on that.
So developing a system like through fast track to allow us to build more renewables
quicker, that's the sort of, um, that's a part of your
role in terms of developing he- helpful systems to help so we can get those better
environmentally outcomes.
Subsidizing fossil fuels are not that.
So, yes, uh, the development of the Fast Track Approvals Act was a significant, uh,
deliverable for the ministry in the last financial year.
Um, we, uh, had experience of building-
Yeah. ... two previous, uh, fast track regimes, uh, for,
uh, the previous government that was, uh, uh, one coming through
the, um,
the natural built environment act reforms as well.
So, uh, uh, the- the- the work that we've
done in the last year has been new and novel in respect of being a one-stop shop
for multiple approvals under multiple parent legislation as opposed to just
approvals under the RMA.
Mm-hmm.
Um, that, uh, regime has been,
uh, uh, pretty effective in terms of the way it has been, uh,
administered, uh, during the- the course of this year.
Uh, and we've got a growing number of applications, um, sort of starting to
fall, uh, become, uh, quite a steady flow now of those coming through the
door.
Yeah. And just, and just picking up on something, um, when the
opposition said sh- uh, in terms of acting earlier, um, to-
to deal with things like, as my colleague highlighted, the, uh, the water
st- the- the water stor- the, um, the water stress that we're seeing, you know,
the- the- the lack of available water available for, um, growing crops
and so forth, like- like in Hawke's Bay and the- the Tukituku water scheme being
available, being able to deliver those things early, as was indicated was a good
idea, then that way we'd be ha- ha- having systems that allow
that. Surely that's- that's part of your role to help develop systems that we can
deliver those projects early to deal with, um, climate challenges going
forward?
Chair, I think the member's question goes particularly to water allocation and-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, the, uh, reforms that we've been working on for ministers will,
um, have more to say about that, uh, in the coming weeks and be before
the committee. Um, uh, it- it's certainly, I- I think, the ministry's view
that the, um, first in, first served approach to our freshwater
allocation and the overallocation that has historically
occurred has, uh, and is continuing to hinder
the business case for, uh, investment in water storage in a range of places.
Um, and certainly, um, my experience with the, uh,
Ruatani Whau water storage scheme, uh, uh, and, or
contemporaneously, the Ngatororo water storage scheme, is that unless you
have, uh, you have clear limits, uh, and those are
enforced, then the scarcity that
needs to drive the case for investment in water storage-
Mm-hmm.
... becomes undermined through either over-extraction of the existing
resource or water users relying on groundwater
takes or surface water takes, uh, and being reluctant therefore to
invest in, uh, in the infrastructure required to store more water.
And I think that is the- the conundrum we've seen under the Resource Management
Act, is it's been very, very hard to get away water storage
schemes, um, partly because of, um, uh,
some of the processes involved. But actually, um, and this was
the case with the Ruatani Whau water storage scheme, it was very hard to get
existing water users to transition from their existing
takes to stored water on the basis of
potentially a higher cost but a greater level of security.
And I think that's part of what New Zealand will have to go through-
Mm-hmm.
... through limit setting, uh, and through a different approach to
allocating water that might not be on a first in, first served basis.
It might need to be on a, um, on a priced basis.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. Look, we'll take a couple more questions and then we'll
wrap up this section of overall performance, but we'll go first to Rachel and then
Chloe.
Thank you. And I won't pick up on, you know, (laughs) what you just said, your last
words there, James.
It's a big- big issue that I know we'll be dealing with,
uh, in next year but still on str-
strategic priorities. We don't, um, have on our
agenda much on natural hazards, so just going to your annual review, I've just
got two questions. And one is, um, that severe
weather emergency recovery legislation and the, all the orders
that came out of it, you've done a review of it.
I was wondering if you can touch on what's been learned from that given
that we'll have more emergencies in the future, if you could
comment on that. And then just the other question is, um,
the national policy statement for natural hazards, and th-
that's gonna be gazetted this year or has it been gazetted?
Can you say where that's at as well? ... your questions.
Uh, s- so with respect to the, uh, SWRLA
legislation,
um, uh, that proved to be, uh, obviously necessary to enact in the
first place when probably, I think in hindsight, um, it's clear
that we should have some standing legislation that enabled us to
respond without having to introduce new legislation.
So, uh-The, um, the mechanisms, uh,
that, that, uh, enabled have been reflected in the,
um, changes to the Resource Management Act that, uh, came through, uh, in the
second bill that was, uh-
Right. ... passed, uh, this year. So, there is the ability now
to, um, be more flexible around, um, the issuing of
emergency consents, uh-
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
... as well. Um, those learnings have been picked up in the replacement of
the Resource Management Act, so the reforms that will come through will enable
greater flexibility around that.
So, um, yes, I think we have learnt the lessons, uh, about how do we enable
rapid recovery, um, and, uh, there will
be the opportunity for more national direction, uh, on that under the
new system, uh, and my personal view is that,
um, uh, w- we, we can be more flexible.
Particularly with publicly owned utilities and their work to reinstate
things like roads, bridges, railway, et cetera, um, without
having to, uh, slow down that work
often. Which is essential to reconnect communities, for example, with,
uh, consenting process when they could be perfectly, um, adequately managed through
things like national environmental standards.
So, I think there's a good opportunity to remedy that.
The MPS on, uh, uh, natural hazards,
uh, is, uh, due to be, um, gazetted before the end of the
year, I don't think.
Thanks. But it's (overlapping conversation) but it's still
expected for this year?
Brilliant. And Chloe?
Uh, if it's all good getting to policy?
Yes. Yes, we can, um, we can move on.
Is your question in relation to the adaptation and emissions, the next-
Yeah.
Okay. So, we, we- unless anyone's got any further questions at all on
the overall performance and strategic direction, we'll move on to
the, uh, next part of our structured agenda for
those following-
Three years old and he doesn't know
his times tables. ... which is adaptation and emissions reduction.
Uh, so we will kick that off with Chloe.
Thank you so much, um, Madam Chair.
Here we
Uh, are government policy decisions still aligned with us meeting global
contributions to stay below 1.5 degrees of warming?
Sam, would you like to have a go at answering that?
(laughs)
Well, it's, is there a... It's quite a broad
question.
Well, it's quite a specific question.
Are government policy decisions still aligned based on the advice
that you have given to government, with us meeting global
contributions to stay below 1.5 degrees of warming?
So, um-
I should note, I have your advice.
So, our international obligations, um, uh, to
superpower agreement to, um, pursue efforts to-
Mm-hmm.
... limiting war- warming to 1.2, uh, 1.5 degrees.
Um, and our domestic legislation also
requires us to, um, put in
place targeting plans to contribute towards, um,
uh, achieving 1.5 degrees.
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Uh, our NDCs have been
set. Um, our first two NDCs have been
set.
Mm-hmm.
Um, they remain consistent with those,
um, objectives,
uh, or with the Paris Agreement, um, expectation.
Um,
and our, uh, domestic target has been set
consistent with, um, the contribution towards
1.5. So, I- they haven't changed. So, that and the NDCs
haven't changed. So, we set those-
I guess if I can-
... previously, yeah.
... elaborate on the question-
Yeah.
... for sake of us getting to the point.
I'm talking about here particularly the government's decisions around halving the
biogenic methane target, right? So, I guess just to lay a few things out for the
sake-
Correct.
... of the committee, um, and the half dozen people who may have been tuned in to
the live stream (laughs) . Uh, can I just confirm that only the
lower bound of the range in the biogenic methane
target is the one which is legally
binding? So, with the government resetting that to
14 to 24%, only about 14% is the legally binding?
Well, electric taxis have to land within the range.
But legally binding, 14%, yes?
Um, yeah, that's the bottom of the range.
Yep. But that, that's the... Yep, that's the bottom of the range.
That's the legally binding point, right?
Well, it's a target. Mm-hmm.
Okay. I feel like we're broadly on the same page.
Yeah.
Yep. Your advice, um, which you gave to Cabinet, uh, and also tracks
with what came out of the independent, um, independent ministerial, uh,
working group, uh, is that a 14 to 15% reduction in biogenic
methane emissions below 2017 levels would achieve no additional warming under a
global mid-range, which is 2 to 2.7 degrees of global
warming. That
is- Is that our advice or is that the methane panel's advice?
That's the methane panel's advice, which you guys have then put in papers to
ministers.
Mm-hmm. Which is their advice, not our advice.
Yeah.
Okay. So, you disagree with their advice?
Uh, we haven't been asked to provide advice on that question.
(laughs) Okay.
No, we are reflecting...
But then it's-
So, that's right. We have-
They have done a report.
Mm-hmm.
They've produced some scenarios, their government advice, we have reflected-
... that those, those scenarios and those calculations, if you like, and
(overlapping conversation)
So, I guess with those two logical premises or those two planks, the first
being, uh, the one about how the 14%, the lower bound
is the, of the spectrum, is the legally binding minimum of the
range. Right? We're on the same page there?
Yeah.
Yep. Uh, and also that the 14%, the lower bound is consistent
with a, uh, 2 to 2.7 degrees of global
warming. We're in agreement on that?
I mean, that is your advice.
I- I- I would want... I- I'm not certain about the latter point because there are a
bunch of scenarios that were produced that looked at different
ranges and looked at different global warming-
Mm-hmm.
... um, scenarios and produced different outcomes.
So, without going over their report in detail to make sure
that...... we are right on the same page and I'm understanding you
clearly.
Mm-hmm.
I just would be a little bit wary of that, but I'm, I'm, I'm taking
that-
Mm-hmm. ... what you are quoting directly what has come from the panel-
Mm-hmm.
... and reflect it in our advice.
In your advice, yep.
And that perhaps could be some further information you could come back with if
there's any, um, uncertainty-
Yeah.
... around who said what and where advice has come from and things because we do
need to stick-
Yeah, I mean-
... to the advice that, um, the Ministry for the Environment has given.
But I guess this is just to unpack that point, this is where things get challenging
because MfE has not been charged with, and we can't charge them with, coming up
with this advice. And they've been asked to help support this ministerial
working group which has come up with this stuff, and now they're just representing
that. So, yeah, anyway, nonetheless, uh, did MfE help write the Minister of
Climate Change's speech at COP30?
Uh, we would have provided material to the Minister's office, but the Minister's
office would have ultimately written the, written the, the speech.
Okay. Uh, the, yeah, the, yeah-
And I, and I couldn't tell you-
Mm-hmm.
... sitting here today what specific parts of the speech we provided advice on.
We would, we could come back to the committee on that.
The only reason I have asked that is because we have a situation where about two
weeks ago the Minister for Climate Change was on the international stage, uh, at
COP30 saying, and I quote, "We must keep 1.5 alive, Mr.
President, and New Zealand is committed." Meanwhile, he had knowingly made
decisions per the Cabinet paper which have taken the advice from the independent
ministerial working group which-
Exactly,
Point of order, point of order.
Um, just reminding the member that we're in annual review.
Yes.
COP30 was, what, a few weeks ago?
Yes, that's right.
Yeah, but-
So we do need to stick to the annual review and the report which we have
here, so-
Mm-hmm.
... um, we are looking back at this.
Totally,
but- So, yeah, so if we can just stick to that.
And also obviously, uh, keep the questions within the, um, the
topics that we've got here, um, for the Ministry for the Environment.
I mean, these are, this is-
No, no.
... advice that was worked on and that the Cabinet question-
So maybe reframe, reframe your question.
And, um, we'll, if we just stick to more questions rather than kind of,
uh, statements and speeches, uh, within the select committee.
So if you just, uh, ask the ministry a, a question would be great,
Chloe.
Okay. Guys, I'm just trying to lay out all of the logical premises because that's
kind of the point of looking for consistency when it comes to government policy and
advice. But, okay. So in the advice, um, that you have given to
ministers around particularly the biogenic methane target, taking
the, uh, ministerial working group's, uh, stuff on no
additional warming, uh, you have specifically made reference to,
uh, how, uh, there is a risk with regard to the interaction between
our nationally determined contribution under Paris and the 1.5
commitments and the differences therein with our emissions budgets,
with regard to the, uh, changes to the meth- biogenic
methane targets and the halving of those, that all other things remaining
equal in the emissions budget, that that could place
higher costs on businesses and households.
And we have provided that advice, yes.
Yeah, so can you please elaborate for the committee what that actually means?
Mm-hmm.
So just to be really clear, with all other things remaining equal in the emissions
budget, with the government choosing to halve the biogenic methane
target, that could potentially, based on, uh, some calculations herein,
equate to approximately $270 more in cost for households
every year.
I'm not sure about the number, but at the, um, structural level in
terms of the point you're making.
Mm-hmm.
So, um, well for...
So, uh, it has the
potential... Well, no, actually this is really important to remember that,
um, it's not the target but it's the actual level of emissions reduction
achieved that ultimately determines how much we
contribute. Um, so I think that's a really important point, so you can
overachieve and, and-
We
could. No, well, you know, our current projections suggest that 24%-
Mm-hmm.
... is, is achievable and what we're tracking towards, so just keep, keep that in
mind.
Thank you.
Um, the, the NDC is an all gases...
Mm-hmm.
... commitment, as, as are our emissions budgets.
So they involve, you know, um, our, our efforts
to reduce carbon as well as methane.
So to the extent, and as I say, this is slightly
hypothetical because it depends on actual actions and progress made, you know,
across the economy in respect-
Mm-hmm.
... to methane, to the extent that a lesser target did
reduce-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, did result in, um, uh, um,
fewer methane, uh, uh, emission reductions than
currently projected, and I'm not suggesting-
Mm-hmm.
... it will, then there would be, uh, potentially a
need for some of that slack at least to be picked
up by other sectors.
Mm-hmm.
So, ETS sectors if you like-
Yeah.
... by the carbon, uh, sectors.
So that's, there is potentially-
Mm-hmm.
... there can be a transfer of, um, burden
between-
Mm-hmm.
... the carbon or ETS sectors-
Oh, thank you.
... and the methane, primarily agricultural sectors.
But that depends on actual progress in reducing emissions, not
just the targets that you said.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
I hear you on that.
Yeah.
And-
Yeah. ... to your point around all of these hypotheticals crystallizing-
Yeah.
... practically, how does that actually end up
occurring?
So, well, look, all we've got at the moment in our current, uh, pro- like all of
these things are subject to quite a lot of uncertainty because you're forecasting-
Yeah.
... into the future. So that-
That's really important. Now it's important because we have our projections are our
best estimate as to how we are currently tracking and those projections which were
released in October have the meth- have methane reductions I think
24.7 or roughly 24, 25% being
Sorry.
I'm just gonna... Yeah. What-
Yeah, just a couple more questions, Chloe.
So, so, so what we've unpacked here is that based on your advice,
potentially as a result of government decisions that have been undertaken to halve
the biogenic methane target, there could be costs that increases on businesses
and households. There could be. You've, you've just said that that's,
that's a hypothetical, that's a potential.
Yeah.
Yes. I guess what I'm trying to get from you, tangibly,
is how do we know when that happens because we're...
You know, I, I get your point-
Mm-hmm. ... around all of the uncertainty-
Yeah.
Right, right. ... and the variables being what they are, but-
... as public policy makers-
Yeah.
... you know, you're- you're providing this advice that costs could be displaced
and increased for households and businesses back on- based on a government decision
made over here, and you're saying, "Well, it depends on what happens out here."
So, when do we know?
Well, we monitor our- well, I'm sure you- as you're aware, we are
monitoring-
Mm-hmm.
... um, our, uh, emissions track, um, all the time.
Mm-hmm. And we have an annual process for updating our projections, and we have a
system in place to make a judgment around, or help provide
advice to ministers as to when they might need to, you know, um, take
additional steps to right the course, if you like.
So, it will become increasingly clear.
Yeah.
But there's a tr- as you know-
Mm-hmm.
... the closer we get to, um, future, the more certain we are about
it, but the less time we have to adjust.
So, that's a-
That's- ... key judgment that you need to, um, be constantly
making, but we do have systems and processes in place-
Mm-hmm.
... to monitor and track and provide advice to ministers so they can make those
decisions as to when, if necessary-
Mm-hmm.
... they might need to look at additional, uh, steps in the future.
Yeah, I- I guess that's kind of-
But we're- we're looking okay at the moment.
Yeah.
Projections are okay.
But we're just gonna-
Yes.
We're gonna just-
Okay-
... move on to a couple of other sups on this-
Who's
finished first? ... because there are other members that want to ask questions. So, Rachel.
Well, it's rather related, um,
you've talked about the 24% in the ...
you think the modeling shows that we're gonna get there.
So, there's a question of why change the target?
But that's not for you to answer. Um, I want to know how
confident you are about your modeling, and how much you
go back to, um, what the projected emissions were-
Mm-hmm.
... in the past and- and how they compare with the past.
So, we've got, um, you can look back at
the actual emissions-
Yeah.
... with the modeling and if the modeling's changed or not.
Is it in response? How- how
Well, look, I- I think- I- I think we- we ...
look, we have a high degree of confidence in the evidential base on which we- we
build the modeling, but it is based on assumptions.
And, uh, the- the- the past track record demonstrates the
dynamism in the economy and the variability, uh, in- in emissions which is
hard to predict as, uh, economic activity, uh, rises
and falls and particularly, uh, in the agricultural sector as changing land
use, uh, occurs in response to, um, changing market price.
So, uh, we do our very best with the available information.
I just would say that-
But you do go back and look at what the actual emissions were-
Yes, yes, we-
... with the modeling?
... yes, we- we certainly do. Uh, I- I think it's important for the committee to
note that the single most dynamic variable in the question of methane
emissions is the availability of technology.
Mm-hmm.
If it was a static circumstance where there was no investment being
made into, uh, technology and innovation to reduce me-
methane emissions, it would be a much more straightforward calculation
around stock numbers and what we expect those to be based on-
on- on land use, dairy prices, meat prices, et cetera.
Uh, that would still have some uncertainty associated with it, but it would be- it
would be reasonably straightforward to forecast that
out. Given that, uh, we have really significant investment
both, uh, within New Zealand and internationally into methane reduction
technologies, and they are showing promise, there's every reason to
believe that there's a high- higher degree of uncertainty as to
where we will finally end up by, say, 2050 which is-
Mm-hmm.
... 25 years away. So, I- I think the important thing is that there is
investment taking place in those innovations, uh, and the fact that they
are showing promise, and I think that gives us some room for some optimism.
So, so thank you for that, but the
... so I think what the member previously w- her document was saying that
if you then don't have any pricing mechanism for methane, what will
that do to your modeling?
So, w- our modeling has used assumptions around the effectiveness
of- of pricing, uh, but, um, again, I
would say that the most dynamic variable is the availability of
technology and the cost of that technology.
Mm-hmm.
So, the pricing- pricing would have to be set relative to being an
incentive to drive the uptake of those technologies.
And until we have a greater handle on their cost effectiveness, um, it's- it's-
it's a pretty arbitrary set of assumptions at the moment.
D- do you-
On the modeling framework more generally, so,
uh, we- we're pretty good and pretty confident about counting
emissions to date, so an inventory does that.
And so, for instance, Emissions Budget One, which we're
roughly at the end of now, we have a pretty high degree of confidence around how
things are tracking there. Obviously, the further you step out into the future, the
more uncertainty there is. I think longer term, I really think in terms of
2050, we should probably be thinking more in terms of scenarios
rather than projections, because it is very difficult to be
certain about how things will play out in 15, 20
years' time. So, I do think that is just a- an acknowledgement that
we can do our best to make judgments about how things will play out,
particularly beyond five or 10 years, but that in the long
term, it- it's possibly better to be talking about and being
about scenarios and different scenarios towards
2050.
Mm-hmm. And finally, um, the- the UN has
undertaken an audit of- of our, I believe,
um, how New Zealand measures climate emissions.
And have you got that audit back? Is there anything-
So, that's the biannual transparency report.
Um, we've certainly been hosting the reviewers here.
I- I don't know if we had a draft yet or
Still- still in progress. So, we had the review team here for a week, um, and
they've given us some initial feedback, uh, from that process.
Really useful exercise for us to learn-
Mm-hmm.
... from other countries. Obviously, the, um, the belts and braces that
we need around the production of the inventory is ...
and see if we have confidence in the- in the processes that we have and the
production of that. The use of models and projections is inherently
complex.
Mm-hmm.
And so, we've got work underway to ensure that we're continuously learning and
improving how we can do those things.
And the- the review team have given us some feedback in that regard as well.
Okay, so I guess the point, um, to Sam's point about, you know,
there being an arbitrary set of assumptions, if you do scenario-
... plans, then you can look at different sets of assumptions.
Is, is that the-
Uh, yeah, look, I think we count well. Okay.
We count to date well. We have to legally be able to
project forward at least the next five years for the next emissions budget with a
level of confidence, which we do, but I think be- once you get beyond sort
of 10 years further out, I think it's better to be
acknowledging that there are different assumptions that you can make about
the thing, likes of technology, which is an obvious one, but other
developments that are hard to be certain about at
the moment, and that there are different pathways you could potentially follow
depending on how things play out in the future, and that you monitor very
carefully and tightly and are ready to move, um,
as and when you need to, yeah.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Uh, I might just jump in because there was a supplementary on that,
'cause you have talked about innovation and technology quite a lot, um, in relation
to-
Yeah.
... emissions, uh, uh, could you maybe elaborate further on some of those
innovations and technologies and any, um, of the work that the
Ministry for the Environment is involved with?
Uh, you know, well, I can, I can start.
I mean, I think the, the, m- it's probably something better put to, I think in
the agricultural space is the space that is where most
of, um, the, uh-
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. ... investment is going, where the biggest opportunity is for New Zealand, um,
where the biggest difference can be made, so I, I probably should
like leave that to MPI to talk in more detail as to the
kinds of, uh, technologies being, um-
Mm-hmm. ... investigated through the likes of AgriZero and others.
Yeah.
Um, and there's a range of those, uh, I don't know,
James, you-
Well, we, look- look, we, we continue to, to talk to AgriZero, uh, talk to
MPI and monitor the development of those, um, those technologies.
Um, see the, uh, the, uh, Ruminant
Biotech, uh, Bolus and Eco Pond by Ravensdown, et cetera,
are all continuing to scale up and MPI is heavily involved
with fast-tracking regulatory approvals for, uh, those products to
get them to market as soon as-
Mm-hmm.
... and look, ministers have been very clear, uh, with officials about their, uh,
desire to see those technologies brought to market as fast as possible-
Mm-hmm.
... so, um, I don't believe at the moment there's really any, uh, uh,
regulatory impediments or policy impediments.
Uh, right now, it's over to the, the, the scientists and the, the
technology developers to just get those, uh, products, uh, to us
as soon as possible.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Yeah, yeah. And now further supplementary from Grant on that.
Thank you. Well, as I enjoy my coffee and my Fonterra mug, so,
what a wonderful discussion we're having.
Um, just in terms of the-
Here's ours!
(laughs)
Well, if you would like a Fonterra mug, I've got some at home, I'll bring it down
for yah.
Elvis' coffee!
(laughs)
Um, look, you would, th- there's...
Several points have been m- made on a number of issues here.
First of all, the, what would be the impact if we were to, um, you know,
talk, talk about the impact of, um, of
methane, um,
of, of other parts of the economy having to pick up cost, potentially, because of
changing methane totals. What potentially would be the impact of, uh,
on fo- on food prices and such like if the farming community didn't have the
technology or had to pay a tax, eh, that,
oh, uh, if it didn't have the technology to reduce
its, um, uh, to reduce its methane emissions,
and what would be the potential flow on effect through to the average consumer
if we had to just reduce numbers and therefore-
Your farming business is-
... and, and reduce the size of your farming business and the profitability of it?
Well, there's a ob- obviously would be a high degree of uncertainty about the, the
level of that impact-
Exactly.
... dependent on, uh, the nature of any pricing mechanism and its impact
on, uh, supply. Um, we obviously also work,
uh, uh, uh, export and import, uh, uh, some dairy products
so it's a global-
Yeah.
... environment we're operating in so it's, i- it would be, uh, it would be, uh,
not possible for us to draw any conclusions about the specific nature of that.
Yeah. Uh, and just in terms of like, you talk a bit, well sort of the question was
raised about using emission pricing to drive, um, to poten-
to, um, to drive behavior change in, in
the farming space. Um, are you conscious of the things that like
some of our exporters are doing which don't involve, which actually create
incentives to ch- drive behavior change?
And so would that not be an- another option instead of just
pricing, um, agricultural emissions?
We have, uh, uh, provided advice to ministers about the
broad range of tools that might be able to be
employed to support the uptake of, um, methane reducing
technologies, uh, for farming. Um, and at this stage,
uh, the government has got a, a, a watching brief around the development of
those technologies. And as we approach, um,
as, as we approach, uh, 2030, there is a, um, a, a
report back, uh, that is required of, um, uh,
of, uh, ministers and officials to, uh, provide further advice
about, uh, opportunities to incentivize that uptake.
Uh, it could be through a pricing mechanism or a, a levy, or, uh, or
it could be, uh, through some kind of subsidy, or it could be through a regulatory
imposition. There's a range of different o- options available for the ministers,
but I think the key point is that in the absence of the technologies being approved
for use and, uh, available and cost-effective,
um, those, uh, incentives or, uh, or pricing
mechanisms would have, um, uh, would have a limited effect.
Mm-hmm. But just quickly-
Can I ask a
question? ... are you, are you conscious of like for example, um, the,
some of the commercial drivers that are happening-
Yeah.
... through Fonterra-
Yes. ... and such like with-
Yeah.
... and, and, and the behavior change and the uptake, the over, from my
understanding um, being a Fonterra supplier is that the, the
uptake of the opportunities to, of those incentives that we provided through
Nestle for example, have been oversubscribed, so which says to me
that with the right incentives, we can get the right outcomes.
Uh, look, look, I think, uh, that there are initiatives, uh,
reasonably tentatively being undertaken by, by companies at the moment, uh,
to, um, incentivize uptake of some technologies on farm.
And I think they're sort of proof of concept at this stage, but, um, they look
promising and, and we continue to talk to the companies on that.
I do also know from Dairy NZ that, uh, they see a, a, a
wide variability in, uh,
modeled, uh, methane, uh, emissions and nitrous oxide
emissions from dairy farming across different, uh, systems.
And, uh, it, it's not, uh, it's not
necessarily, uh, exactly which system you are
using, uh, across the different, uh, dairy platforms.
It is more things like feed conversion ratios and the management of your
pastures, et cetera. And I do know that Dairy NZ is rolling
out a dashboard for, uh, all dairy farmers that will
include information about on-farm emissions and how they go
relative to benchmark. And that will provide opportunities to, uh,
advise farmers about how, within their existing system, they can make changes to
reduce, uh, emissions. And certainly, the information that we've seen suggests that
there is some low-hanging fruit there and there is the ability to reduce methane
emissions before we even start using some of those technologies.
Mm-hmm.
And, and or pricing mechanisms. Thank you.
Um, and look, we'll go to Lam now and then Chloe.
And
Thank you. I just had a supplementary about
when we were on emissions reductions and the certainty or relative
uncertainty of how we know.
Noting that, um, in April 2025, you
state that New Zealand greenhouse gas inventory showed emissions fell in
every sector of the economy between '22 and
'23.
Yeah.
What is now our expectation or understanding of
'24 and '25?
Uh,
so, um, the inventory,
uh, Tash, correct me, uh, if I'm wrong here, is,
um, uh, there's a bit of, about an 18-month lag
in the inventory. So, the latest
full year's emissions that we have, I think are
from '23?
Yeah.
Is that right, Tash?
So, the updated inventory will be released in April next year.
Just the nature of the, the UN processes that sit behind the inventory, it does
take 18 months to produce that level of certainty around the, the
information that's available.
I, I think... So, we will get those numbers for '24 next
year.
Mm-hmm.
I think that at the higher level, um, the, there's some
variables moving in different ways that we've had, um, and these affect
not just
this current year's emissions, but have an in- influence on what you
assume for the sort of short to medium term particular.
So, I think we've had increased agricultural activity on, on the one
hand, which will have contributed to, um, additional
emissions, um, and it's been, you know, commodity prices have been high and,
um, the ag sector's been performing well. So that, that will have an...
That will create an upward pressure on emissions.
On the other hand, most of the other sectors have seen, um, reduc- have
tended to see and experience and we expect some reductions in emissions
across energy and transport. Um, last year there was a bit
more coal burn, but less so this year.
Mm-hmm.
So, overall, like it, yeah, there's a sort of a balancing off
of, um, expected, um, increase in agricultural productivity-
So-
... versus emissions and
Okay, so-
... other sectors coming up.
So, likely, we may see every other sector apart
from dairy and coal?
Uh,
Reducing, could be our expectation, but we don't know
at this stage?
So, yeah. So, our current
projections for... So, we updated our
projections going forward-
Mm-hmm.
... um, for the next few years, and they do point to,
um, additional, um, likely, um, uh,
emissions from agriculture, but reduced from the energy
sector. So coal's sort of part of the, um, energy sector and it's, it's
a key non-renewable part of the, of, um, energy transition, but also
transport, um, likely to be down. We can provide you
with a, with a detailed rundown of those updated projections which do, are
broken down by sector, if that would be helpful.
That'll be great. Thank you. And-
Yeah.
... to what extent do you think the government's legislative
program is enabling, for example, those increases in the
agricultural sector emissions versus simply
the commodity price and
Yeah.
you've referred to?
I'm not the expert on that, but definitely the, um, economic kind
of, um, incentives have been pretty strong given prices for-
Mm-hmm. Thank you.
Thank you. Look, we will wrap this section up very shortly, but, uh, Chloe, you've
got a couple of further questions.
Yes, I just wanted to go back to the one
(smacks lips)
... question that I was on, uh, before we switched tack.
So, uh, your advice on reduced or on, on the government's
range of options for its intention to reduce the biogenic methane target,
you say that there are implications for our obligations under trade agreements.
Could you be explicit and clear with the community, uh, with the, uh, committee
about what those implications for our trade agreements are or could be when
it comes to reducing our biogenic methane targets?
So, our advice that you're citing, I just want to be
clear-
Mm-hmm.
... has said there are trade implications.
Yeah.
Um, oh, I'm sure there are tra- considerations in
respect to, um, uh, trade and
international, um, uh, expectations.
Um, but I'm, I'm very confident ministers have taken advice and are very
comfortable about where they have landed in relation to those issues.
Um, just, uh, just... Chloe, have you got an example there of, uh-
Uh, it's in the-
There's a- there's official information here.
Make it clear where the information is coming
from. Uh, this- this is an OIA, uh, that is of
the many pieces of advice that MFE gave to ministers into
Cabinet on reducing the biogenic methane target.
Okay.
And the only place that's not redacted around trade implications is the line about
how there will be implications for our obligations under trade agreements.
So I was just hoping that you could elaborate on that.
Yeah.
I mean, yeah.
You can imagine that like a comprehensive advice would say these are all things you
need to be aware of in making these decisions.
But I think, you know, and the ministers have been pretty clear that they're
comfortable with-
Sure.
... the decisions from a trade perspective.
Well-
Okay, so-
...
Did you want, have you got another question there, Chloe?
I mean, I guess just to make that crystal clear, uh, this would have been
MFE perhaps contemplating the EU and UK FTAs where we
have made commitments to not weaken our environmental protections for
sake of trade benefit.
Yes, and I- I think more broadly, we have, uh, advised ministers,
uh, along with our colleagues who have primary responsibilities in this
area, that, uh, it's, uh, it-
will be in how New Zealand communicates, uh, its policy mix and its choices
that will ultimately determine, uh, what the implications could be from a trade
perspective. So I think y- you need to look at it in the round.
Um, I think if New Zealand has a defensible position, for
example, that, uh, it is investing in
agricultural emissions mitigation technologies and, uh, has
committed to reviewing its policy mix as those
technologies become available, as Cabinet resolved to do earlier this year,
um, that that may be a defensible position with trade partners.
Uh, and just finally to try
and resolve- Yeah, just got to... Yeah, carry on and then I've got a couple of quick sups that
have come up on that.
I will leave the committee after this. So...
(laughs) It's no offense, guys.
But I just wanted to try and get some sense of reconciliation between a number
of figures. So in 2024 protect- projections with
pricing, it was saying that we'd have a 24.9% reduction by 2050,
uh, in biogenic methane. But advice this year says that that falls to
10% without pricing, but that doesn't take into account additional
market-led abatement. Uh, then we have 2025 official predictions
which have no pricing saying that we achieved 24.7%.
How on earth do all of these numbers make sense?
Yeah, they, the- the latter point around the
removal of price, pricing not being as instri- instrumental
has been the result of some updated assumptions
about what market, uh, uptake or- or market
solutions will deliver. So there has been further work done,
uh, at the request of ministers around, uh, some of the modeling assumptions
on that. So we looked hard at the availability of those technologies and
what we might assume, uh, in the absence of pricing.
There has been an evolving picture about the implications
for, uh, uh, pricing or not having
pricing. Um, but ultimately all of those,
uh, assumptions as noted in the advice that the member
quoted, uh, is, um, well, the- the earlier,
uh, the earlier advice with the 10%, uh, that was quoted
was, uh, excluding what the market might
deliver. So I think that is the key point is that, um,
pricing can have an effect, but it's highly determinative, you know,
determinated by what is the price.
Is- is the price, you know, insignificant
or is it massive? Does it drive big land use change? All of those sort of things.
So- so- so just to assume a price doesn't necessarily give you an answer about how
much emissions might be reduced. There were some assumptions about what a
pricing mechanism might do, but the most important thing in all of that
advice is that it will be ultimately the market that determines the
availability of technologies and their uptake, and that is the most dynamic
variable.
Further to that point, would you agree or disagree with the Climate Change
Commission who in hearings earlier this week said that, and I'm paraphrasing here,
but for all intents and purposes, the market signal that is being sent by halving
our biogenic methane targets is basically to not try as
hard?
Well, I- I think what I'm seeing from AgriZero and from the investment
by, um, the companies involved, uh,
is a lot of trying very hard. And so I don't think we've seen
any evidence that any reconsideration of the government's policy has changed, the
level of effort going into either the research, uh, or into the
companies starting to progress their own, uh, initiatives.
So then what is the material implication of halving the target if everything is
remaining as it was?
Well, I think to Sam's point earlier, it's ultimately the, uh, the
emissions that are ultimately reduced that is most important.
Target is directional, um, and it certainly signals, uh,
where, um, the government is comfortable to go.
And I think what it reflects in terms of the review is that the government
had some discomfort given with the- with the
earlier, uh, methane target on the basis that there is this
uncertainty around the availability and cost effectiveness of
technology. So I think it is fair to say that the government has
recalibrated on the basis of that uncertainty, but the
actual level of emissions reduction that's achieved will be determined
by the technology which continues to be invested in at the same rate
as it was prior to the change in the, uh, the targets.
Sorry, so just to be really clear, you're currently telling the committee that the
government is halving the biogenic methane target, but that is having
absolutely no impact whatsoever on market, market signals,
and the behavior of farmers, peak bodies and ag and otherwise?
It's having no- no discernible impact that- that we have seen
around the level of effort being put into the, uh, science and research
around, uh, reduction talks.
Thank you. Uh, look, Rachel has got a supplementary on this and
so does Grant. So, and then we will wrap up this area.
Can we go to adaptation after this then?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Okay, great. Yeah, I've got (00:01:59)
Ah-
I think we've done (00:02:00) adaptation then,
Ah, well, still, still, still on methane and this recalibration you were just
talking about, and, um,
at the start of Chloe's questions, she was talking about advice on trade
agreements. And we've had in the media recently ministers with the Prime
Minister and Todd McClay and others, Simon Watts,
um, saying that they didn't think that
this change would impact on trade agreements, and then we've also
seen in the media different diplomats saying, "Well, yes, we've been raising these
issues." Do you... What is,
what is, um,
your advice on, on this potential
impact on our trade agreements?
So, we're not the advisors on those trade agreements.
I mean, that's really a combination of MFAT and MPI
would be the ones to ask. But I think all I can really do is observe
that what ministers have said is that, like, they've considered these
issues and they're comfortable where they are.
But on the detail, um, we're not the ones
to speak to those considerations and advice is coming from other
quarters.
But you have given some advice on it that was being quoted at you before
by Chloe.
Y- Y- We've noted that there would be implications, and we've also advised
ministers that, that the primary place to get that advice is
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and that's where they're taking their
substantive advice on those, those matters.
Um, look, the, the Minister, uh, uh, for Climate Change
has a, um, a private secretary from the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, uh, in his office and receives- Mm. ...
separate advice regularly from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on the
wider inter- international landscape and implications of New Zealand's climate
policy. So, that is their primary, um, line of, um,
of, uh, policy advice, not ours.
Thank you. Um, look, Grant has a supplementary on this-
Mm, yes, Mrs.-
... and then we will... And then Lahn.
Yeah, but just have you given any, um, advice to,
uh, uh, around the, what would be the impact to the New Zealand
economy if we, if we kept, if we had a tar- if we were aiming to
achieve 47% methane reduction without the available technology, what the
impact that would be to the New Zealand economy?
Uh, there has been, uh, econometric modeling done around the
impacts on, uh, uh, agricultural, uh, output
and GDP. I don't have the numbers in front of me.
I don't know, Sam, but-
No, I don't either.
Yeah, but certainly we have provided advice on that
historically.
And, um, would Deputy provide that, um...
We can provide that to you.
Thank you.
Yeah, if you could take it back, that would be great, if you could send that
through.
Thank
you. And just, we'll take one last question on the emissions reduction, and then we'll
move to adaptation, so Lahn.
Thank you. I just wanted to ask about the Emissions Trading
Scheme liability because you do specifically mention that's your
biggest non-departmental financial risk-
(clears throat)
... particularly regarding setting of the NZ unit allocation
expenses.
What has the impact of the changes that the government
announced in August '24, the changes to the settings of the
Emissions Trading Scheme? They were, uh, promoted
as, um, with the goal of promoting
market certainty on price control and unit setting for the next five
years. What has been the impact of those changes, and has
it provided any form of market certainty?
Sorry, uh, could I just ask to clarify which, which
changes?
So, in your timeline in August 2024, it says,
"Annual Emissions Trading Scheme settings decisions announced-"
Oh,
right, yeah. "... to promote market certainty on price control and unit setting for the
next five years."
Yeah. Yeah. So that's, so every year, we have to go through a
process to provide... Well, the, first of all, the Climate Change
Commission's provide, uh, provides advice, um, on
how to, uh, go about the next
year's, uh, auction settings. That's effectively how many additional
units should the government auction-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, into the market. So they undertake that process, and then we
also, uh, the minister then, um, well, um, subject to
Cabinet's, uh, approval runs a consultation process, and then Cabinet makes
final decisions. So, they, they did, we went through that process last
year, and um, and we've also been through it this year.
And, uh, notably this year, there was a decision taken to actually
provide fewer units into the market than the Climate Change Commission
had, um, recommended.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so further tightened supplies beyond what they had
recommended. Um, and I think that that did actually provide a level
of, um, uh,
stability, provided for some stability in the market, which at that
time was concerned about, um, I think there was much
commentary around the risks of adding the additional 13 million units that the
commission had recommended-
Okay.
... being supplied into that market.
Okay, so that's just referring more to like a BAU process-
That's an annual process.
... rather than specific-
Yeah, correct. ... different decisions being made?
Correct.
Thank you.
But it's an impo- it's a very important annual process, but it is an annual
statutory process we go through.
Okay, thank you.
Thank you. Look, we are going to move on now, um, to
adaptation, and we'll start with the first question from Rachel
Guest. Yes, uh, so the Ministry has been working now for some
years on looking at this issue of existing activity
that are in areas that will be affected by climate
change. And the, um, of course, the
Finance and Expenditure Committee did a report on that.
And so I want, want you to comment on, on where you're at with legislation and
thinking on this. And also,
um, that report back from the Finance and
Expenditure Committee did have agreement from
across-... across the parties about the need for, um, high-quality
data. And, and if you can comment on, uh,
what government's doing about this, that would be useful as
well. And, um, also interested
in the climate change minister saying that market-based
approaches is, is needed in adapt- in terms of adaption,
and what, what that means and how that interacts with the other
pieces of work.
Uh...
So perhaps joining the, the, the pieces of that question together,
uh, uh, from the, the, the back
end, uh, the overarching objective of the adaptation
work is to ensure that New Zealanders are as informed as possible
about climate risk, uh, and the potential implications for them to
enable them to take, uh, action, both at sort of
household scale but also at community scale.
Um, we, we are presently working on, uh, amendments to
the, uh, Climate Change Response Act, which will be, um,
the primary vehicle for bringing in the adaptation, uh, framework,
which, uh, will place a requirement on,
uh, councils to undertake adaptation
planning. Um, that is something that they are empowered to do today, both
under, um, the Local Government Act and, and the Resource Management Act,
um, but... and some councils have done, but it's highly variable.
So that is about sending a base expectation that there is planning around that.
That planning will need to be based on, uh, good data and
evidence. So the work that we have underway now to
produce a national flood map, uh, which we're in the process of
procuring presently, um, will be the first, uh, foundational
layer of that data set to enable councils to do their planning,
but also homeowners to, uh, start making their own
decisions. Um, there are property-scale mitigations that people, uh, can
undertake to obviously protect their home, and,
um, that will be further supported by the National Policy Statement, uh, on
Natural Hazards that will, um, uh...
we referred to earlier that will be gazetted by the end of this year.
Um, I think all of that comes together to, um, uh, ultimately
inform property markets, uh, insurance markets, insurance
pricing. And, uh, uh, I believe what the minister was
referring to is that the, the market-based signals here are those
that, uh, might reflect, uh, a property value,
uh, uh, from, uh, climate risk. Uh, flood risk, for
example. Uh, and the, the sooner that,
um, property markets reflect those risks, uh, and that's then
re- also reflected in insurance premiums, uh, and in the,
the price of finance, the more that the market will,
uh, respond, I guess, to climate risk, and we will
see, uh, behavior, uh, associated with those,
those risks to either, either miti- mitigate those or for people to make
different choices about where they build.
So... Hmm. This
is quite disappointing. I think what I've just heard you
say
is that those people who don't have choices
but may already be in properties in place that are gonna be
subject to climate hazards
have, uh, nowhere to go, that the government has given up
on any form of bipartisan work to
deal with those most vulnerable communities.
So most definitely not saying that.
There is further work, uh, that we're doing with the Treasury that has report
backs, uh, next year around cost sharing, and so there is
still, uh, work to be done around the apportionment
of, uh, cost burden, if you like, between central government, local
government, households, insurers, and the banking industry.
So that is an ongoing body of work. Um, I think the gov- government has
signaled that in the long term some, uh, progressive
reduction of, uh, support from taxpayers and ratepayers
may be fiscally, uh, required, and certainly
was the advice of the independent advisory group that, um, that the, that
the government move in that direction over time.
Um, but obviously we need to give t- uh, people time for adjustment, and it
may well be, uh, that, uh, the government, uh,
determines that a hardship scheme, uh, of some enduring nature
is required, and that could be the nature of some cross-party, um, discussion and
support. So all that work lies ahead.
Uh, but... Okay, so, so that
independent report said government's not gonna have a
role, and of course we know
real politic is that, um, governments will always have a role, and we're seeing
that in the Hawke's Bay-
Right.
... and in, um, Auckland as well with those full market
value buyouts that happened. And, you know, I know all
the, all the forecasting from Treasury is that governments
can't continue to do that at market value with the amount of hazards that we're
having. It's, um... Th- that's where we're
at. But we do have these very vulnerable communities,
and, and what you're saying now is, "Well, we'll go to a hardship
fund," rather than looking at, uh, and t-
tell me if I'm wrong, rather than looking at what's, um...
the reports of the EDS and what was in the Remison review and,
and that other work at what the FEC was looking at as
well, of a more fulsome climate adaptation piece of
legislation that went beyond hardship but actually had a whole
lot more tools for councils and central government and
communities to be able to, um,
move when need to be moved or talk about triggers and work out, uh, what those
pricing caps would be.
S-
Has that all fallen away?
No. No, it has not. So ministers haven't ruled out any of those
potential tools. That is all part of the work that lies ahead.
Oh. Okay.
Um, the hardship...
... uh, funding, uh, notion was a recommendation of the independent
advisory groups. They didn't say that, um, they, the government and the taxpayer
should walk away completely. They recognized it would be a- an ongoing enduring
role for the government in addressing hardship from,
uh, severe weather, uh, impacts on homeowners.
The question is, is how do we avoid moral hazard whereby,
um, uh, insurers, bankers, and, and homeowners
all wash their hands of the ultimate risk here, and
the government becomes the insurer of last resort?
So-
The government already is the insurer of last resort, and we've seen that with
those-
The government has become, has become that-
... numbers.
... and I, I, I think as the member noted, um, there are fiscal sustainability
issues with the government being the insurer of last resort.
So, the question is how do we, um, create a policy mix that
rebalances that so all parts of the system are doing as
much of the heavy lifting as possible?
Just on that order of things, I do think that the, the adaptation framework that
was released was quite clear on like a couple of key first steps being, you know,
improving the data everyone's acting on, which is the flood map, getting
some proactive planning going, which, as you know, the adaptation
planning, um, expectations and the legislation around that being the second
piece, acknowledging that cost sharing, you know, remains really fundamental
and g- getting the right expectations set long term.
Just, you know, but recognizing there's a transition, so how you
deal with that transition period and acknowledging, you know, some
communities are where they are at the moment, but trying to make some progress
so that over time you are actually making it clear where the primary
responsibility sits for worrying about the exposure of, of your
property. So, there is definitely an expectation that some work will be
progressed, um, and that there, I think will be opportunity for
some engagement, cross-party in due course as well.
Um, how far it progresses pre-election, uh, I think there's some judgments to be
made about how far you would take it pre-election as opposed to next term.
Okay. And you both referenced the flood map.
Do you want to tell us some more about that?
Perch, do you want to tell us about that?
Thank you. So, uh, we have work underway to look
at how we can build from, uh, existing data and developments
that have already been put in place, um, regionally,
uh, to develop our property level information to help people
make better decisions, uh, across the country.
You would have seen, um, in recent times, uh, Earth Sciences
released, uh, some, uh, modeling information and, and
a map. This was, um, presenting a, a
picture that was at a, a scale that had, um, a
focus on the places where most people live.
So it wasn't a complete map, uh, of the country and didn't provide the granular
level down to a property level. So, that's the work that we've got ahead of us.
Um, it does require some investment, so we are
going to- (coughs) That was Wendy's question.
... um, uh, to, to try and secure the investment to enable the work
to be supported.
Okay. Thank you.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Look, we've got a couple of supplementaries on this.
We'll go to Laan first.
So,
we know that ideally like every local community would be
putting in place adaptation plans now, but there's obviously
limited scope, resources, the likes.
What is the actual process for determining how you
prioritize those local adaptation statutory plans that local
authorities are meant to put in place?
Well, so the, the, the, the policy, uh, uh, intent as will
be reflected in the legislation is that councils start with their highest
risk areas, and that will need to be informed, uh, by the,
um, by the flood map and other available hazard information.
So, oh, I see-
Will be prioritized.
So, the council-
Correct.
... is directing that. There isn't necessarily like available
government support?
No, we will work with councils in helping them identify those areas, but
ultimately the exercise is for them to do as part of their planning work.
I- it's expected to be integrated with the spatial planning processes that will be
part of the new planning system to identify, but then it would be
those areas, those at-risk areas, but then there'd be, need to be a subsequent
process to actually develop the plan once those, um, areas had been
identified. There's, you know, those would be reasonably long term
processes.
Mm-hmm. Just, just on that, 'cause I've got a supplementary on that, 'cause I'm
quite interested in the, in the mapping of course-
Mm-hmm.
... being from the region, um, where we had Cyclone Gabrielle, and I
suppose that was a region, Hawke's Bay, we're kind of forced to look at
adaptation really seriously now, and obviously there's a lot of areas that have
already been red zoned and category three, et cetera-
Mm-hmm.
But as, as part of this mapping and the, I suppose,
um, kind of vision is that every region across the country
will be doing that before they actually have to because
we have a cyclone on our doorstep.
To certainly get ahead of the severe weather, um, but look, uh, as we
discovered in, uh, Hawke's Bay, um, the clock's already ticking, so
yeah.
Mm-hmm. And would that mapping impact, you know, what has already been
decided in Hawke's Bay? Because obviously, you
know, there's a lot of emotion and there's a lot of,
um, I suppose, uh,
fear, uh, across New Zealand in terms of areas
potentially that, you know, are more hazardous?
Yeah.
Look, I, I think there, there will be hard conversations had-
Mm-hmm.
... because the, um, the data, uh, once it gets down to property level, uh,
will reveal levels of risk and vulnerability-
Mm-hmm.
... that, um, some home- homeowners will be unaware of.
Um, and certainly, you know, I think the view of officials is that
people are, are, are better to be, uh, forewarned than
not-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, and if we know that there is a flood, uh, uh, hazard, then I think we're
duty-bound to ensure that, um, citizens and homeowners are aware of
that. It will then spark questions about, uh, what can be done
about it, and in many cases, there will be mitigations that could be invested
in, and that will then be a conversation between, um, uh,
ratepayers and-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, and councils about, um, the willingness to invest and the various
trade-offs around that.
Yeah, um, Rachel's got a sup on that too.
Yeah, it, so you talk about the flood maps first, and how does it
relate to the other hazard mappings, of, and other hazards?
If you could comment on that. And then, um,
secondly, this information obviously is
then for
councils to update their, their plans and to be able to do their hazards.
And so, how, are you concerned that fast
track applications can then just, you know, come over the top
of all of that planning?
Do you want to answer the first part?
Yeah.
I'll respond to the, the first part, if I can.
And, and a really important point to recognize that this is flood risk and there
are a number of other risks, uh, that are really important to be considered,
particularly in the spatial planning provisions in, uh, uh, in the proposed new
system. And so, um, we're currently in, investing
in, uh, some data sets to help ensure that that's a,
that's a broader picture than just flood risk, uh, considered and able to be taken
into account. And-
But at the same time-
...
(whistles) ... if you had a heavy rainfall flood, then that's gonna relate to slippage as
well. That's right. So, a range of different risks.
I also just wanted to refer members to, uh, the long-term
insights briefing that we released in recent time in development with
DPMC.
Mm-hmm.
That was really important-
Yeah. ... to recognize national scale risk and hazards, and that flooding is
one of those and there are a number of, of others, of course, to be considered by
decision-makers.
Mm.
Thank you.
So just on, on fast track-
Yeah.
... Chair, if I could just,
uh- Yes. ... answer that, that-
Yes.
... quickly. Um, so the, the, the fast track
mechanism is, is to enable, uh, discretion by, uh,
panels, uh, and the ultim- who are the ultimate decision-makers
on applications that can transcend
existing, uh, planning provisions.
So, enables flexibility, um, but they
are required to take into account, um, uh, natural hazard risk.
And as this information comes forward, uh, it, it could well
inform a decision to decline an application for an activity.
I think what's most important here is that we have the data and
information available for the best possible decision-making.
I don't think fast track changes that.
It is this work to inform it that's most important.
Well, it's taken into account when you have to give effect
to- Look, we've got another,
... the solicitation of the project.
... question, um, from Ryan Hamilton. Who got a different status.
Thank you, Chair. Um, yeah, just following on this conversation, um, regarding,
um, a bit about flood maps, and I see in page 23 of your report,
we've also got the, uh, New Zealand Land Cover Database, or
LCDB as you refer to. Some of us were also involved in that adaption
framework piece with FEC, so I'm interested to see where that was progressing.
The Parliamentary Commissioner of the Environment sort of waxed lyrical about
data, data, data. And so, I can see you've made some really good investment in, in
this. Is this, are you going to be a single source of truth to some
extent? Because that was the issue with regional councils owning some IP or data
and the real disparate ability for, you know, a
cohesive response, in terms of...
So I'd just be interested to, for your expansion on that, uh,
LCDB or, and, and how we're, how, how we're progressing in that
space.
Yeah, the, the Land Cover Database that you refer to-
Mm-hmm.
... is a, is an important data set for us to understand land
cover. Um, it is, of course, only one part of what we need to understand
about how land is, is used, uh, to inform us in making
decisions about resilience and, and other things.
So that's an investment, an ongoing investment that, that we have made.
It is important for us and, and we will perhaps shortly move to our
next agenda item, uh, where we will talk more about these matters.
But it's critical for us to be a reliable and
robust source of data or information that is
accessible, uh, at all levels to inform decision-makers,
and that that, uh, information is, is produced and shared in a way that
people can make use of that data. So, I, I think, um,
that's absolutely, uh, critical to our role, uh, and we
would see that as part of, uh, um, the work
underway, uh, with the new, uh, planning system that you'll hear more about next
week.
Mm.
So. So are you running point essentially in being lead agency in
collating this? Because that was the issue, was who do we go to?
It's so disparate. Is that, do you see that part of your role,
Ministry of Environment, or?
We see, uh, the role that we have in relation
to, uh, data, uh, as, as fundamental to our role as Lead
Adviser on Environment and Climate.
Uh, we are not the only agency, so we work in close partnership with
LINZ who have, um, s- you know, some responsibilities with
regards to spatial data sets and property data sets that are equally important.
So it's a partnership in that regard.
Uh, but certainly we see the role that we have to uplift the
consistency and confidence in data and information across the
country, uh, as, as very much, uh, fundamental to our
responsibilities.
Mm.
Look, I think we might move on to the next topic because, um, it
does, uh, talk about reporting and outcomes and data.
And I think, uh, given the time, we have got a lot of topics to cover
and, uh, we, uh, yeah, need to move through.
So, um, we will move on to environmental reporting and
outcomes for members, um, and obviously the
updates that the Ministry for the Environment, um, gives.
So, uh, we'll start with a question from Larn
Farm.
Thank you. Um, you mentioned your domain reporting
generally provides high quality independent evidence
on the state of New Zealand's environment and the drivers of change.
Do you think that information is actually informing and shaping
government decisions? And what are some examples that you can think of, where it
is?
Mm.
Uh, certainly I think it, it's in- informing, so,
uh, uh, I know that, um,
uh, the Minister for the Environment, for example, did read, uh, cover to cover
the, uh, Our Environment 2025. Um, and
so I think, uh-Uh, certainly the work is
ensuring that, uh,
the government is informed about the issues facing the country.
Um,
and it continues to inform how we think about,
uh, policy responses on things such as air, freshwater,
biodiversity as well. So, um, uh, w- we've
had, um, numerous conversations with ministers about, um,
biodiversity, for example, um, uh, which the state o- of
pressures it's under. And that has informed ongoing thinking
about, um, development of legislation, for
example, um, and the legislation that will be brought
to the house shortly to replace the Resource Management Act, was informed by that
and will, um, reflect that.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. And Rachel?
Yes, um,
what- what's the ministry doing to understand the health impacts of air
pollution? Um, h- how are you
prioritizing air pollution? I know that some work
was, had been in the works when we were in
government. I haven't seen much of it. Can you comment on where that's at?
So, Tash, do you want to answer that?
Yeah. Thank you, Amber. Uh, just to
recognize that the air is one of a number of domains, uh, that
we have long term data sets on, and that we have, uh, worked hard
through our change process to ensure that the level of resourcing and,
um, scientific expertise, we have some very passionate and dedicated
scientists within the organization supporting that work.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, in terms of- of air quality, it is an area we are
maintaining, um, the- the- the capability that's needed.
Uh, often means that we need to draw from expertise across the country and regional
councils-
Yes.
... and- and other places. Uh, y- you will be aware of,
uh, the work that we have done with the Ministry of Health in previous times and
that the HAPNS modeling report, which, uh, was released a- as part
of our air report, uh, um, at the, in
October of 2024. Uh, that is an
ongoing, uh, responsibility that we have to report against the domains so
we continue to invest in understanding, uh, where we can.
There is always a balance of priorities and, uh, and- and a
balance of- of how the funding c- can be stretched to- to cover,
uh, but it's certainly still a core part of our reporting program, uh, and
certainly part of, um, what we would look at within the- the new planning
system, uh, the new Natural Environment Act, as we think about the
role of environmental limits within the new system.
Mm. So, we've now got a clear link between lung
cancer and air pollution, and I don't know how
that correlates with the work that you were doing with the Ministry of Health since
that reporting's come out, but are you,
um, are you continuing to work with the Ministry of
Health? And you've just mentioned the RM reforms and is- is this
where we expected to see updates in the air- air
pollution standards?
Uh, so in terms of the work of the M- Ministry of Health, that was about
understanding the evidence base and ensuring that we had models that were reliable
and trustworthy. And Alison, you can a- add to that, uh, if you
wish. Uh, so that work i- is ongoing as part of our environmental
rewarding program.
So that's about understanding, uh, the- the state, the- the pressures and the
impacts. You would have noted through our air
report, uh, that we were seeing improvements in- in some
areas, uh, and, uh, seeing the impact
whereby, um, initiatives can, uh,
can a- a- attack the issues of most important with, so there's home heating,
we can see it with transport. So it really does show that we- we can make a
difference. Uh, but we need to continue to understand those health impacts on an
ongoing basis as the science evolves.
So I- I could help the member out-
Yeah.
... because I sus- suspect you're wondering about the status of the National
Environmental Standard on air quality and the fact that it hasn't been revised for
some time.
Mm-hmm.
So it will be reviewed and rewritten as part of the
National Direction Suite under the resource management reforms.
Uh, and we will be seeking to undertake that work next year.
Okay, thank you.
And Grant?
And, or just a further sup- just a little sup- there, um, when you're talking
about, you know, best bang for- bang for buck, what- what policy settings can you
do to reduce air pollution in the air sheds that are, um,
have the higher levels? So on vehicle use, is
there a difference between, um, diesel- diesel and petrol
fueled vehicles versus, uh, electric
vehicles?
Yes, uh, Alison, do you want to speak to the vehicle emissions data?
Uh, yes, I'm not sure I have it in front of me.
Um, we just know that it's improving 87% at most
monitor sites. Perhaps we can come back to you with the actual details.
No, no, I just wanted the yes.
She was, she wanted to make the point.
That's all that was about.
Can I just offer to the member, I'm happy to provide, uh, the-
the modeling results and the- the information that we are working on that we'll
take into account in the policy process that James mentioned.
Great. Thank you.
Thank you, and Grant?
Yeah, um, yeah. Um, a couple of things.
Just- just, um, a quick comment about your mapping.
Please, m- um, from my experience of doing work with regional
council around Dargaville and the Northern Wairoa, please truth test som- something
that's really important because sometimes the maps will demonstrate
something and they go and, um, uh, and then you
then speak to locals and actually it's, "No, it doesn't work that way.
The river flows this way or it floods like that." It's just really important
'cause we're particularly, I'm stating the obvious I susp- suspect,
because it affects people's properties so much.
Just make that, make that observation.
So perhaps that's a question that can be asked.
No, no, no.
(laughing)
It's not a question, it's a statement.
Can I assess that
as a question?
Yeah, just- just- just on, in terms of truth testing, I presume you do that or
how, to what level?
So, our environmental recording data, uh, relies-
Mm-hmm.
... on information provided to us from the regional councils.
I guess.
Uh, and from other data sources.
Mm-hmm.
We have a- an important process to QA that data.
We work in partnership with Statistics New Zealand to ensure the credibility of
that data.
Yeah.
We know that, uh, we have a role to play in helping improve
the standards-
Yeah, it's
really Mm-hmm. ... to approve efficiency, uh, and- and quality, uh, so
that the monitoring network across the country, uh, can be fit for purpose.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Thank you. Um, and just, um, I-
And, Lan, did you have a question?
It's on that same-
Oh, exactly the same point.
Okay. Yeah, Lan?
So, just to use the wetlands mapping
as an example, because it is an area that has been quite fraught with
regional councils having a lot of difficulty with actually notifying
people where wetlands are and so they know to protect them or
otherwise-
Um, can you help us understand this?
'Cause it's saying that it will help, it- it's at a national level
and that it will help regional councils meet national requirements and better
protect wetland ecosystems. How- how is that intended to
work and how is that working in practice?
Can you just clarify, uh, what you're referring to?
The updated wetland mapping in the-
Okay.
... Landcover Database.
Yes. In the Landcover Database. Um, so that's an important role for
us as technology improves, that technology can help ensure the
accessibility and coverage of, um, information like
this. And so the- the Landcover Database, uh, relies on
technology to- to help with that. And we've got to ensure that that
information can be, uh, available in a consistent way across the
country so people can have what they need to make decisions into the future.
So, oh, so, sorry. Is that still a re- you're gathering the
data from the regional councils rather than you're doing a national level
wetland mapping layer?
So, the- the wetland mapping layer is dependent on satellite
technology, uh, and so that- that- that provides,
um-
Okay.
... more information
So, it is at a national level-
... through Landstats.
Yeah. ... and then you're feeding that to the regional councils?
Manaaki Whenua Landcare, uh, actually now, um,
Biosciences New Zealand-
Okay.
... uh, is the, um, uh, holder of the National Landcover
Database, and they, uh, from funding
provided by- by us, uh, and other sources, um, update
that using best available technology.
And so it has undergone some investment, some improvement drawing on the satellite
technology and that is then made available to regional councils.
We use it for national picture. They use it for more localized management.
Okay. And- and... Oh, sorry.
Carry on.
How is that playing out in terms of actually
better protecting wetlands and ecosystems?
'Cause there was that, you know, the government's decision to delay
or stop the identification of new SNAs, for
example. Is this helping
inform them to how would they better protect
wetlands through this?
This, there's an important link here to the new system and to
spatial planning in the new system where, as we've talked about before, ensuring
that
data and information is available at- at- at spatial
planning times and enables decisions to be made, uh, in an
informed way at scale.
Okay.
Alison, did you want to add in terms of the Landcover Database?
In terms of specifically the Landcover Database, one, it tells us where things
are, and there is a new iteration about every five years so we can also see the
rate of change, which is an-
Yeah. ... important part of it.
Yeah.
Um, and just to, um, remember this point, we, um, it is satellite
technology, but there is lots of, you know, ground truthing and- and validation to
make sure that what we're seeing from a- an image is actually
accurate. And do you report on those changes
that you see over that five-year period?
Yeah, so we would typically use, um, the Landcover Database as one of our inputs
into environmental reporting.
Into the domain reporting?
Into the domain reporting so we can-
Okay.
... see changes, not just in wetlands but in things like, um, highly productive
land or-
Mm-hmm.
... um, you know, modified landscapes.
Thank you.
Look, thank you very much. We are gonna take a break 'cause we are scheduled for a
break. And I think after a few hours, we, uh, all need to stretch-
Yeah. ... our legs. So, um, we will come back and we will come back to environmental
reporting and out, uh, at 10:35. So
thanks.